rusqlite/README.md, before:

# Rusqlite

[![Travis Build Status](https://api.travis-ci.org/jgallagher/rusqlite.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/jgallagher/rusqlite)
[![AppVeyor Build Status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/jgallagher/rusqlite?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/jgallagher/rusqlite)
[![dependency status](https://deps.rs/repo/github/jgallagher/rusqlite/status.svg)](https://deps.rs/repo/github/jgallagher/rusqlite)
[![Latest Version](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/rusqlite.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/rusqlite)
[![Docs](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/rusqlite)

Rusqlite is an ergonomic wrapper for using SQLite from Rust. It attempts to expose
an interface similar to [rust-postgres](https://github.com/sfackler/rust-postgres).

```rust
use rusqlite::{params, Connection, Result};
use time::Timespec;

#[derive(Debug)]
struct Person {
    id: i32,
    name: String,
    time_created: Timespec,
    data: Option<Vec<u8>>,
}

fn main() -> Result<()> {
    let conn = Connection::open_in_memory()?;

    conn.execute(
        "CREATE TABLE person (
                  id              INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
                  name            TEXT NOT NULL,
                  time_created    TEXT NOT NULL,
                  data            BLOB
                  )",
        params![],
    )?;
    let me = Person {
        id: 0,
        name: "Steven".to_string(),
        time_created: time::get_time(),
        data: None,
    };
    conn.execute(
        "INSERT INTO person (name, time_created, data)
                  VALUES (?1, ?2, ?3)",
        params![me.name, me.time_created, me.data],
    )?;

    let mut stmt = conn.prepare("SELECT id, name, time_created, data FROM person")?;
    let person_iter = stmt.query_map(params![], |row| {
        Ok(Person {
            id: row.get(0)?,
            name: row.get(1)?,
            time_created: row.get(2)?,
            data: row.get(3)?,
        })
    })?;

    for person in person_iter {
        println!("Found person {:?}", person.unwrap());
    }
    Ok(())
}
```

### Supported SQLite Versions

The base `rusqlite` package supports SQLite version 3.6.8 or newer. If you need
support for older versions, please file an issue. Some cargo features require a
newer SQLite version; see details below.

### Optional Features

Rusqlite provides several features that are behind [Cargo
features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html#the-features-section). They are:

* [`load_extension`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/struct.LoadExtensionGuard.html)
  allows loading dynamic library-based SQLite extensions.
* [`backup`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/backup/index.html)
  allows use of SQLite's online backup API. Note: This feature requires SQLite 3.6.11 or later.
* [`functions`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/functions/index.html)
  allows you to load Rust closures into SQLite connections for use in queries.
  Note: This feature requires SQLite 3.7.3 or later.
* [`trace`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/trace/index.html)
  allows hooks into SQLite's tracing and profiling APIs. Note: This feature
  requires SQLite 3.6.23 or later.
* [`blob`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/blob/index.html)
  gives `std::io::{Read, Write, Seek}` access to SQL BLOBs. Note: This feature
  requires SQLite 3.7.4 or later.
* [`limits`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/struct.Connection.html#method.limit)
  allows you to set and retrieve SQLite's per connection limits.
* `chrono` implements [`FromSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.FromSql.html)
  and [`ToSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.ToSql.html) for various
  types from the [`chrono` crate](https://crates.io/crates/chrono).
* `serde_json` implements [`FromSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.FromSql.html)
  and [`ToSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.ToSql.html) for the
  `Value` type from the [`serde_json` crate](https://crates.io/crates/serde_json).
* `url` implements [`FromSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.FromSql.html)
  and [`ToSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.ToSql.html) for the
  `Url` type from the [`url` crate](https://crates.io/crates/url).
* `bundled` uses a bundled version of sqlite3.  This is a good option for cases where linking to sqlite3 is complicated, such as Windows.
* `sqlcipher` looks for the SQLCipher library to link against instead of SQLite. This feature is mutually exclusive with `bundled`.
* `hooks` for [Commit, Rollback](http://sqlite.org/c3ref/commit_hook.html) and [Data Change](http://sqlite.org/c3ref/update_hook.html) notification callbacks.
* `unlock_notify` for [Unlock](https://sqlite.org/unlock_notify.html) notification.
* `vtab` for [virtual table](https://sqlite.org/vtab.html) support (allows you to write virtual table implemntations in Rust). Currently, only read-only virtual tables are supported.
* [`csvtab`](https://sqlite.org/csv.html), CSV virtual table written in Rust.
* [`array`](https://sqlite.org/carray.html), The `rarray()` Table-Valued Function.
* `i128_blob` allows storing values of type `i128` type in SQLite databases. Internally, the data is stored as a 16 byte big-endian blob, with the most significant bit flipped, which allows ordering and comparison between different blobs storing i128s to work as expected.
* `uuid` allows storing and retrieving `Uuid` values from the [`uuid`](https://docs.rs/uuid/) crate using blobs.
* [`session`](https://sqlite.org/sessionintro.html), Session module extension.

## Notes on building rusqlite and libsqlite3-sys

`libsqlite3-sys` is a separate crate from `rusqlite` that provides the Rust
declarations for SQLite's C API. By default, `libsqlite3-sys` attempts to find a SQLite library that already exists on your system using pkg-config, or a
[Vcpkg](https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg) installation for MSVC ABI builds. 

You can adjust this behavior in a number of ways:

* If you use the `bundled` feature, `libsqlite3-sys` will use the
  [cc](https://crates.io/crates/cc) crate to compile SQLite from source and
  link against that. This source is embedded in the `libsqlite3-sys` crate and
  is currently SQLite 3.30.1 (as of `rusqlite` 0.21.0 / `libsqlite3-sys`
  0.17.0).  This is probably the simplest solution to any build problems. You can enable this by adding the following in your `Cargo.toml` file:
  ```
  [dependencies.rusqlite]
  version = "0.21.0"
  features = ["bundled"]
  ```
* You can set the `SQLITE3_LIB_DIR` to point to directory containing the SQLite
  library.
* Installing the sqlite3 development packages will usually be all that is required, but
  the build helpers for [pkg-config](https://github.com/alexcrichton/pkg-config-rs)
  and [vcpkg](https://github.com/mcgoo/vcpkg-rs) have some additional configuration
  options. The default when using vcpkg is to dynamically link,
  which must be enabled by setting `VCPKGRS_DYNAMIC=1` environment variable before build.
  `vcpkg install sqlite3:x64-windows` will install the required library.
  
### Binding generation

We use [bindgen](https://crates.io/crates/bindgen) to generate the Rust
declarations from SQLite's C header file. `bindgen`
[recommends](https://github.com/servo/rust-bindgen#library-usage-with-buildrs)
running this as part of the build process of libraries that used this. We tried
this briefly (`rusqlite` 0.10.0, specifically), but it had some annoyances:

* The build time for `libsqlite3-sys` (and therefore `rusqlite`) increased
  dramatically.
* Running `bindgen` requires a relatively-recent version of Clang, which many
  systems do not have installed by default.
* Running `bindgen` also requires the SQLite header file to be present.

As of `rusqlite` 0.10.1, we avoid running `bindgen` at build-time by shipping
pregenerated bindings for several versions of SQLite. When compiling
`rusqlite`, we use your selected Cargo features to pick the bindings for the
minimum SQLite version that supports your chosen features. If you are using
`libsqlite3-sys` directly, you can use the same features to choose which
pregenerated bindings are chosen:

* `min_sqlite_version_3_6_8` - SQLite 3.6.8 bindings (this is the default)
* `min_sqlite_version_3_6_23` - SQLite 3.6.23 bindings
* `min_sqlite_version_3_7_7` - SQLite 3.7.7 bindings

If you use the `bundled` feature, you will get pregenerated bindings for the
bundled version of SQLite. If you need other specific pregenerated binding
versions, please file an issue. If you want to run `bindgen` at buildtime to
produce your own bindings, use the `buildtime_bindgen` Cargo feature.

## Author

John Gallagher, johnkgallagher@gmail.com

## License

Rusqlite is available under the MIT license. See the LICENSE file for more info.

Commit message:

Remove most of the code using `feature=bundled` as a version check

rusqlite/README.md, after:

# Rusqlite

[![Travis Build Status](https://api.travis-ci.org/jgallagher/rusqlite.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/jgallagher/rusqlite)
[![AppVeyor Build Status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/jgallagher/rusqlite?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/jgallagher/rusqlite)
[![dependency status](https://deps.rs/repo/github/jgallagher/rusqlite/status.svg)](https://deps.rs/repo/github/jgallagher/rusqlite)
[![Latest Version](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/rusqlite.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/rusqlite)
[![Docs](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/rusqlite)

Rusqlite is an ergonomic wrapper for using SQLite from Rust. It attempts to expose
an interface similar to [rust-postgres](https://github.com/sfackler/rust-postgres).

```rust
use rusqlite::{params, Connection, Result};
use time::Timespec;

#[derive(Debug)]
struct Person {
    id: i32,
    name: String,
    time_created: Timespec,
    data: Option<Vec<u8>>,
}

fn main() -> Result<()> {
    let conn = Connection::open_in_memory()?;

    conn.execute(
        "CREATE TABLE person (
                  id              INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
                  name            TEXT NOT NULL,
                  time_created    TEXT NOT NULL,
                  data            BLOB
                  )",
        params![],
    )?;
    let me = Person {
        id: 0,
        name: "Steven".to_string(),
        time_created: time::get_time(),
        data: None,
    };
    conn.execute(
        "INSERT INTO person (name, time_created, data)
                  VALUES (?1, ?2, ?3)",
        params![me.name, me.time_created, me.data],
    )?;

    let mut stmt = conn.prepare("SELECT id, name, time_created, data FROM person")?;
    let person_iter = stmt.query_map(params![], |row| {
        Ok(Person {
            id: row.get(0)?,
            name: row.get(1)?,
            time_created: row.get(2)?,
            data: row.get(3)?,
        })
    })?;

    for person in person_iter {
        println!("Found person {:?}", person.unwrap());
    }
    Ok(())
}
```

### Supported SQLite Versions

The base `rusqlite` package supports SQLite version 3.6.8 or newer. If you need
support for older versions, please file an issue. Some cargo features require a
newer SQLite version; see details below.

### Optional Features

Rusqlite provides several features that are behind [Cargo
features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html#the-features-section). They are:

* [`load_extension`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/struct.LoadExtensionGuard.html)
  allows loading dynamic library-based SQLite extensions.
* [`backup`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/backup/index.html)
  allows use of SQLite's online backup API. Note: This feature requires SQLite 3.6.11 or later.
* [`functions`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/functions/index.html)
  allows you to load Rust closures into SQLite connections for use in queries.
  Note: This feature requires SQLite 3.7.3 or later.
* [`trace`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/trace/index.html)
  allows hooks into SQLite's tracing and profiling APIs. Note: This feature
  requires SQLite 3.6.23 or later.
* [`blob`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/blob/index.html)
  gives `std::io::{Read, Write, Seek}` access to SQL BLOBs. Note: This feature
  requires SQLite 3.7.4 or later.
* [`limits`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/struct.Connection.html#method.limit)
  allows you to set and retrieve SQLite's per connection limits.
* `chrono` implements [`FromSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.FromSql.html)
  and [`ToSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.ToSql.html) for various
  types from the [`chrono` crate](https://crates.io/crates/chrono).
* `serde_json` implements [`FromSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.FromSql.html)
  and [`ToSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.ToSql.html) for the
  `Value` type from the [`serde_json` crate](https://crates.io/crates/serde_json).
* `url` implements [`FromSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.FromSql.html)
  and [`ToSql`](https://docs.rs/rusqlite/~0/rusqlite/types/trait.ToSql.html) for the
  `Url` type from the [`url` crate](https://crates.io/crates/url).
* `bundled` uses a bundled version of sqlite3.  This is a good option for cases where linking to sqlite3 is complicated, such as Windows.
* `sqlcipher` looks for the SQLCipher library to link against instead of SQLite. This feature is mutually exclusive with `bundled`.
* `hooks` for [Commit, Rollback](http://sqlite.org/c3ref/commit_hook.html) and [Data Change](http://sqlite.org/c3ref/update_hook.html) notification callbacks.
* `unlock_notify` for [Unlock](https://sqlite.org/unlock_notify.html) notification.
* `vtab` for [virtual table](https://sqlite.org/vtab.html) support (allows you to write virtual table implemntations in Rust). Currently, only read-only virtual tables are supported.
* [`csvtab`](https://sqlite.org/csv.html), CSV virtual table written in Rust.
* [`array`](https://sqlite.org/carray.html), The `rarray()` Table-Valued Function.
* `i128_blob` allows storing values of type `i128` type in SQLite databases. Internally, the data is stored as a 16 byte big-endian blob, with the most significant bit flipped, which allows ordering and comparison between different blobs storing i128s to work as expected.
* `uuid` allows storing and retrieving `Uuid` values from the [`uuid`](https://docs.rs/uuid/) crate using blobs.
* [`session`](https://sqlite.org/sessionintro.html), Session module extension.

## Notes on building rusqlite and libsqlite3-sys

`libsqlite3-sys` is a separate crate from `rusqlite` that provides the Rust
declarations for SQLite's C API. By default, `libsqlite3-sys` attempts to find a SQLite library that already exists on your system using pkg-config, or a
[Vcpkg](https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg) installation for MSVC ABI builds. 

You can adjust this behavior in a number of ways:

* If you use the `bundled` feature, `libsqlite3-sys` will use the
  [cc](https://crates.io/crates/cc) crate to compile SQLite from source and
  link against that. This source is embedded in the `libsqlite3-sys` crate and
  is currently SQLite 3.30.1 (as of `rusqlite` 0.21.0 / `libsqlite3-sys`
  0.17.0).  This is probably the simplest solution to any build problems. You can enable this by adding the following in your `Cargo.toml` file:
  ```
  [dependencies.rusqlite]
  version = "0.21.0"
  features = ["bundled"]
  ```
* You can set the `SQLITE3_LIB_DIR` to point to directory containing the SQLite
  library.
* Installing the sqlite3 development packages will usually be all that is required, but
  the build helpers for [pkg-config](https://github.com/alexcrichton/pkg-config-rs)
  and [vcpkg](https://github.com/mcgoo/vcpkg-rs) have some additional configuration
  options. The default when using vcpkg is to dynamically link,
  which must be enabled by setting `VCPKGRS_DYNAMIC=1` environment variable before build.
  `vcpkg install sqlite3:x64-windows` will install the required library.
  
### Binding generation

We use [bindgen](https://crates.io/crates/bindgen) to generate the Rust
declarations from SQLite's C header file. `bindgen`
[recommends](https://github.com/servo/rust-bindgen#library-usage-with-buildrs)
running this as part of the build process of libraries that used this. We tried
this briefly (`rusqlite` 0.10.0, specifically), but it had some annoyances:

* The build time for `libsqlite3-sys` (and therefore `rusqlite`) increased
  dramatically.
* Running `bindgen` requires a relatively-recent version of Clang, which many
  systems do not have installed by default.
* Running `bindgen` also requires the SQLite header file to be present.

As of `rusqlite` 0.10.1, we avoid running `bindgen` at build-time by shipping
pregenerated bindings for several versions of SQLite. When compiling
`rusqlite`, we use your selected Cargo features to pick the bindings for the
minimum SQLite version that supports your chosen features. If you are using
`libsqlite3-sys` directly, you can use the same features to choose which
pregenerated bindings are chosen:

* `min_sqlite_version_3_6_8` - SQLite 3.6.8 bindings (this is the default)
* `min_sqlite_version_3_6_23` - SQLite 3.6.23 bindings
* `min_sqlite_version_3_7_7` - SQLite 3.7.7 bindings

If you use the `bundled` feature, you will get pregenerated bindings for the
bundled version of SQLite. If you need other specific pregenerated binding
versions, please file an issue. If you want to run `bindgen` at buildtime to
produce your own bindings, use the `buildtime_bindgen` Cargo feature.

If you enable the `modern_sqlite` feature, we'll use the bindings we would have
included with the bundled build. You generally should have `buildtime_bindgen`
enabled if you turn this on, as otherwise you'll need to keep the version of
SQLite you link with in sync with what rusqlite would have bundled, (usually the
most recent release of sqlite). Failing to do this will cause a runtime error.

## Author

John Gallagher, johnkgallagher@gmail.com

## License

Rusqlite is available under the MIT license. See the LICENSE file for more info.
